Firstly, let us say thank you to Heritage Lottery in Wales for enabling us to bring you these podcasts.
My name is Jamie Baker and I am part of Horn Development Association, HDA, in Cardiff.
And this site, Black Diverse and Welsh, is intended to bring together lots of initiatives
that we've been involved in in terms of Black and Diverse people in Wales.
But most immediately, a series of episodes, a series of contributions, which are about Cardiff.
And if you sit outside the Norwegian Church on the bay in Cardiff and in better times have a cup of coffee,
hopefully this series of podcasts over the next few months will give you an idea what that place you're looking at used to be,
what's happened there and what it represents to the people who live or lived in the streets you, to a large extent, can't see anymore.
And this is Matthew Reed.
For me, I was not born at the tidal bay era. I'm more Buteone.
My family's lived in Buteone for Tiger Bay for over 100 years.
My great-grandfather came over from St. Kitts. My grandfather came over from America as a GI.
That's on my mother's side. On my father's side, my great-grandfather came over from Cape Verde or Cape Verde.
And that's sort of my little bit of melting pot of being a descendant of the Tiger Bay area, if that makes any sense,
of what Tiger Bay brought to not only Wales but to the world.
Truly, you represent the multiculturalism of the...
There's only one United Nations.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So for me, like I said, my mother's father was a GI from Cincinnati who came here and married my grandmother,
but they ended up splitting up. My father's father's father, Philip, was from Cape Verde.
My great-grandfather on my mother's side is from St. Kitts.
And my grandmother, who he married, was half Egyptian and half English.
So for me, I've got a lot of mixed blood inside me.
But like I said, in Buteone or maybe even in Tiger Bay at one point, there were many religions and many colours and creeds
living in this one area, but still everybody had a respect for everybody's religion.
Whether people choose to believe that religion is real or not, the respect was still here in Buteone as a multicultural society
or as a multicultural path, the most multicultural path of Canada.
And through me going to Mount Stewart Primary School and having Betty Campbell as my headmistress, I will put down to her,
that lady there, if it weren't for her, I'm not saying I would have a different aspect on life,
but through the unlimited assemblies and clans and religions we celebrated in school,
we were all sort of made to respect each other's religion, culture, creed.
And that's one of the benefits of coming from Tiger Bay and Buteone.
People talk about Betty Campbell in a really, really special way.
Yeah, because she was, someone said, a trailblazer yesterday.
So yeah, she did lead the way for Black mixed race teachers or for just teachers in general.
The lady, she had a strong mind, the boas, and she delivered.
And like I said, through me living in Buteone, I do have a respect for culture and respect in that aspect.
So I am thankful that I went to that school.
Living in Buteone at the time, it was a different era.
Like I said, it was before the phones, not pre-computer games,
because living in the 80s, we were all Americanized.
We all had our skateboards at the same time.
We all had our roller skates at the same time.
We all had our bikes at the same time.
So when it was Christmas, we were all out in the square playing on our bikes, playing football.
Now it's a different world.
Now kids are all online, texting and everything else.
And a part of me, when I look at Buteone now, it's like a part of Buteone has died for me,
because when they took the lung out of Buteone, which was Angeline Street,
for me that was the lung with over maybe, I'm not sure if there was eight maids and exes there.
I couldn't tell you how many maids and exes there was,
but just to think that when there was over maybe 20 families, maybe even more, that lived in each maids and exes.
So when you're taking out eight maids and exes with 20 plus families living in these maids and exes,
you're taking a big portion of Buteone to renovate it and to put people in now who I believe don't understand
that the area they inherited is probably the most culturalist part of Canada.
And it's sad to see that the maids and exes that we used to run through and chase and whatever are gone.
And like I said, with that, the memories of Buteone, I'm not saying Buteone is dead,
but what I am saying is the history of that era is gone.
What I had is gone. What the old ones in the 70s had is gone.
There's no pubs up there no more.
In fact, there's one pub in Buteone or on the Bay or whatever you want to call it,
is the packet, probably one of the longest, probably one of the oldest pubs without a name change.
That makes sense.
So that's the only the last standing pub in Buteone and it's the packet.
So whatever agenda is being or agenda kind of development has on Buteone, it's worked, unfortunately.
But there is still a community there.
We see the community come out recently from Hamon the Ravage in the case ongoing at the moment
with regards to him and South Wales police.
That shows me that there's still a community there.
They are Dutong, that they want to understand what's going on.
But like I said, I do believe that some people who inherited Dutong now just don't understand
the historical aspects of that place there.
Like I said, if it were for cows and a dog, then there wouldn't be no transport, you know, whatever.
And with the transport, it obviously brought the people into Buteone or Tiger Bay at that time.
We then settled down and they found it.
One question I'd ask, mate, is would Cardiff be the capital of Wales without the docks?
Where would the money have come from?
I would like to know, yeah, obviously, Cardiff was obviously the leading import or export of coal.
And obviously with that, because we've got capital status.
And I'm not taking it away from Cardiff or the docks, but maybe we could have got the status
due to us having a cathedral in our city.
So maybe we've got a city in a city and maybe that might have attracted attention as well as the docks.
But yeah, I do believe the docks in itself are the financial apparatus, would you say?
Well, yeah, and if you think about the docks, maybe financially drove Cardiff.
Well, who drove the docks? It's the people you're talking about.
Exactly. And especially having, you could call it the Welsh Wall Street down in the Bay, which was the coal exchange.
And yeah, it's nice to think how on a level or how far advanced Cardiff was at that time
with regards to the shit and quality of people that used to come to Cardiff.
How everything went electric, that was it. Dead. No more.
It's a bit like a motor city. It's like Detroit, when everything just went a bit and they started losing and losing money.
And now you see Detroit, Detroit is what it is.
It shambles and it's lucky that they've been able to use whatever ugliness they took to the beauty, so to speak.
And it was an ugliness in the dollars. And as we see the docks now, that's what the docks is.
A multi-billion pound franchise, or multi-million pound business.
And it's just sad that people have had to be sacrificed in that process.
But it feels always different in the 80s. We had the youth club, Chalky White.
I remember being in the van with Elvin Blades and someone said to me,
Chalky White has just passed away. And I was really young. I remember that one image.
I wasn't again, I was Butow, but I was more of, I weren't Tiger Bay era, if that makes sense.
I'm 43 nearly in October. So yeah, that's one of my earliest recollections of Chalky White.
People speak about Chalky White and his effect on them when they were kids.
I crossed a long span.
Yeah, but I was more of the Steve Kyra era. The Algerian Foster, Mr. Foster as we used to call him.
Sheila Haddie, Frankie Ammon, Frankie Norman. So I was that sort of moniker on a Wednesday.
I'd sneak into the club to pretend I was dancing, just to not dance and play on the floor.
So that was how we used to sneak in on a Wednesday. They used to do dance lessons on a Wednesday.
You pretend you're dancing and then what do you do then? You just go up and then you go play pool or table tennis or watch a film or whatever.
But yeah, we were sort of a different era then. It was nice. It was a real community at its best.
And yeah, fair play to Steve Kyra because Steve did his best for us when we were kids.
He took us, took us always trying to do our best.
I remember when he turned to my mum and he said, oh look, we're doing a run up with the Canada Devils.
Does your boy want to come and train or do this and do that?
And we were going up at the corporate events and we were allowed to go in there for free.
Obviously we had the name drop, etc. But yeah, the Six Week Holidays in the youth club was the best.
I couldn't think of anywhere else I'd want to be on the Six Week Holidays in school or out of school.
And yeah, the Six Week Holidays youth club was the one for me at that time.
Do you think we miss those youth clubs?
Well, that's the one reason why kids aren't paying attention properly at the moment because they don't know what a youth club is.
No kids these days know what a youth club is.
I think because the financing was there to keep kids at bay or to give kids something to do
or try and get something like to try and find what the kid likes to then maybe channel that positive energy out of the kid
to maybe nurture that kid and try and make him become that thing he wants to be.
It doesn't matter what it is, but there were places for that and there's no places like that at the moment.
So right now kids know about street selling drugs, carrying knives and whatever culture comes with that.
That's not a street element at the moment.
And it's sad. 13 year old kids shouldn't be on the street selling drugs.
They should at least be in a youth club doing 13 year old things.
The things have elevated so far from being in a youth club at maybe 10, 11 years of age to now 10, 11 years of age.
They're more on the street selling drugs.
I remember I was in Barrie. My family are from Barrie.
I can remember when I used to go over to the bay, used to go out with the boys in the bay in the 80s.
Everybody was into something that was healthy and physical, whether it was boxing, martial arts.
Yeah, yeah. Because I'm a caddiff.
Yeah, I'm a caddiff and the doctor and the specialist was speaking about it to somebody.
The amount of people, whether they were black or white, that come from that kind of caddiff who didn't get a fair shot, who really were something.
You get what I'm saying? They were like people like...
You look at the kayaks and you think everyone was afraid to play them.
Yeah, this is where I was going to go to. This is where I was going to go to. The kayaks.
They were famous. They were famous around wherever.
People knew that the kayaks were to be true. You can't beat the kayaks. If you do, then you're done.
But yeah, the kayaks, they were a formidable team.
And like I said, people like Sammy Jones, up until like Gerald Zerlis, they've had some top players play for them.
But players, you should have been playing professional rugby, whether it was league or union, it doesn't matter.
There was a lot of people there that shouldn't have been playing for Wales, you could say. Maybe, I don't know.
Well, I was in Maisteg, Bridgend, the other day and someone said to me, do you know caddiff, I said yes.
Big old white guy and he said, my Maisteg Rugby Club, we used to be afraid to play the kayaks.
But what a party, what a friendly group of people. If you played them, you also had the time of your life.
Yeah, because at the end of the day, whatever's on the pitch is left on the pitch.
And it's good that people can show other people from out of any way that they're past, future,
that people can be accommodating and friendly and non-judgmental.
And I do think sometimes people who maybe didn't want to play the kayaks, I'm not saying they were racist or maybe they were scared or whatever.
But maybe they just had this thing in their head that when they were going to go down there, they were going to get burned at the stake or something in their head.
Maybe that was the fear factor, maybe that was the fear factor going into the ghetto and playing.
Obviously they were afraid of going somewhere with them up.
Yeah, just that thought of coming to Caddiff and then leaving there, taking the rooms and then going back to the pub and then apparently drinking and eating food.
That's a good memory. No violence.
He said that someone from the team, a couple of people from the team, said to him, stay later.
And they took him to a club in Butetown, in the bay, that used to be a church.
Yeah, that was the Casablanca.
But they'd never been to a place like it.
I can imagine, I can imagine, I can imagine, I can imagine what it felt like when they walked in.
You know, he said, I'd never heard Reggae before. Whoa!
Yeah, I bet he didn't forget Reggae either.
No, that was the point. And I was saying to him, you like Reggae. And he was rolling off people's names. It's clear that that stuck with him forever then.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. That's what's good about breaking people down as well.
Like, because people could have a stereotype on you.
But then it's like, once you get to know somebody, they may be your thoughts on somebody could just immediately just be like, perhaps I've made a stupid decision all my life.
I'm hating on this one person or this one person because of what he looks like or because of who he is.
But immediately being brought down by humbleness and hospitality.
And I do think that can work. So I'm probably just breaking people down. It can be done, but it's how it's done.
And obviously, because rugby is more nonviolent compared to football.
So I do believe sometimes it's a mentality thing as well.
But I'm not saying anybody like with any anybody from football would have done anything to it.
But what I'm saying is I just find the mentality a little bit different.
I mean, when all said and done, this is an old white guy walking up to an old black guy in the middle of a small town near Bridge End.
And he's not worried about asking me questions. And you know, people walk around you in some places.
OK, and that was because of his experience with the kayaks and the people from it.
Yes. Yes.
What about what about music? You know, music.
What do you remember about going out?
Well, for me, it was more you had your places like the Baltimore, the Paradise Club.
The Paradise was a thing run on a Sunday.
Well, it was not on every day, but the main day would be Sunday.
Obviously, it would be on Saturday and Friday.
But, yeah, the Paradise Club was a haunt for South Caddiff.
For most people who were connected in with that old day tradition of yelling and etc.
So it was a place for where people could go to, so to speak, on a Sunday.
And that would be the haunt for people to go to.
Casablanca, I was too young for Casablanca.
I went to a party there, a friend's birthday party there.
Other than that, no, I never went to the Casablanca.
Other venues in Caddiff.
Yeah, I'm from a different area, that's what I'm saying.
So places for me were only the Baltimore.
Not the Baltimore.
Well, the Baltimore was open on a Sunday as well.
You had the Irish place on the corner as well, which was open on a Sunday round jam.
That's why I don't understand.
All these pubs were.
Look, I once heard a pub down on the corner.
McHugh's?
No, McHugh's was a pub.
It was up in the Fighting Irish logo on the outside.
Oh, I know what you mean.
It's in Longstreet Square.
It might have been McHugh's, mate.
So you had that pub there pumping full of people.
Andy Babges across the road.
You had the Shippin' Pilots around the corner.
And the way you had the packet.
And literally, all these pubs are now dead.
Dead.
People are struggling.
Gentrified, the other pubs.
You can get a meal, you can't get a live band.
Yeah, well that's what's become of living in Caddiff.
Because it's like, they're only going for one type of people.
Obviously it's the fancy dress brigade.
The fancy dress brigade, like the hen party and the stag party.
They want to accommodate their mountain Caddiff.
And not keep Caddiff traditions.
Once they took the, what's the pub in Caddiff in Tom Mow?
The Market Cavern?
Yeah, I know the market.
No, no, no, no, no.
Once they changed the number that River Cavern was,
I was like, no, that's it, we're done.
It's officially done.
Because that sign didn't need to be changed in my eyes.
I know it's only a small thing, but all these new signs that they've got up on these new pubs now,
they look terrible, they look cheap.
And literally it's just become like you said, the gentrification of houses, pubs.
Everything has to look a certain way.
It's got to be a second we're pleading to a certain individual.
So unfortunately, we're going to pay the piper for it.